GSoC: pytest-ifying the testing suite (#248)
pybamm-team/pybamm.org: content/gsoc/2025/_index.md

---
title: PyBaMM GSoC 2025 Project Ideas
summary: This page contains project ideas for PyBaMM's participation in the Google Summer of Code program in 2025. These projects are intended to be suitable for students or professionals who are new to PyBaMM or to open-source software development in general, and wish to work on a project that will be beneficial to PyBaMM and its community.
---

{{< admonition note >}}

We are planning on taking part in Google Summer of Code 2025. We will keep updating our project ideas and add potential ones here as soon as they are available. Stay tuned and keep following this page for updates!

> The projects below are arranged according to their priority (that is, the first project has a higher priority than the second one, and so on).
> 

Reviewer: How about this?

```suggestion
The projects below are arranged in descending order of priority.
```

### Potential mentors

* [Saransh Chopra](https://Saransh-cpp.github.io/)
* [Agriya Khetarpal](https://github.com/agriyakhetarpal/)

<!-- * [Valentin Sulzer](https://github.com/valentinsulzer)
* [Robert Timms](https://github.com/rtimms)
* [Arjun Verma](https://arjxnpy.vercel.app/)
* [Ferran Brosa Planella](https://www.brosaplanella.xyz/) -->

> ## Refactoring PyBaMM's testing suite with pytest plugins and hypothesis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Refactoring PyBaMM's testing suite with pytest plugins and `hypothesis`
```

PyBaMM (Python Battery Mathematical Modelling) used `unittest` as its testing framework until last year. However, thanks to the efforts from [@prady0t](https://github.com/prady0t), it now uses `pytest.` `pytest` is a modern and community-maintained testing framework for Python that is more flexible and feature-rich than the built-in `unittest` module. Migrating such a huge codebase from `unittest` to `pytest` was an exceptional feat; however, because of limited time and resources, we could not leverage several amazing things that `pytest` offers. There have been efforts to introduce `pytest` specific features, but these efforts have been distributed, and now the codebase is at an awkward stage where some tests utilize `pytest`'s capabilities and some do not.

> PyBaMM currently uses different tools/functionalities to do the same thing at different places in the testing suite. This project aims to standardize the tesing suite to use one tool for one job, most likely, a `pytest` compatible tool. Moreover, the project will also require choosing the right tools (by researching multiple testing tools available on the internet) and writing instructions for these then standardized tools in documentation. Besides `pytest`, there are several other testing issues that can be used to get familiar with PyBaMM's testing suite, such as [modernizing NumPy array assertion tests](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/issues/4488). Mentee can use their proposal to suggest additional `pytest` plugins and features that they think will benefit PyBaMM's testing suite.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PyBaMM currently uses different tools/functionalities to do the same thing at different places in the testing suite. This project aims to standardize the testing suite to use one tool for one job, most likely a `pytest` compatible tool. Moreover, the project will also require choosing the right tools (by researching multiple testing tools available on the internet) and writing instructions for these then-standardized tools in the documentation. Besides `pytest`, there are several other testing issues that can be used to get familiar with PyBaMM's testing suite, such as [modernizing NumPy array assertion tests](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/issues/4488). The mentee can use their proposal to suggest additional `pytest` plugins and features that they think will benefit PyBaMM's testing suite.
```

> Furthermore, [Hypthesis](https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io) is a modern property-based testing implementation for Python. Property-based testing is a testing method that automatically generates and tests a wide range of inputs, often missed by tests written by humans, ensuring robust tests and helping developers find edge cases more easily. The library creates unit tests. In a nutshell, Hypothesis can parametrize test, running test function over a wide range of matching data from a "search strategy" established by the library. Through paratemerization, Hypothesis can catch bugs which might go unnoticed by writing manual inputs for the tests. There have been a few efforts ([pybamm-team/PyBaMM#4703](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/issues/4703), [pybamm-team/PyBaMM#4724](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/pull/4724)) to add property-based testing, and this project would aim to identify all the test functions that can benefit from and use `Hypothesis` to implement property-based testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, [Hypthesis](https://hypothesis.readthedocs.io) is a modern property-based testing implementation for Python. Property-based testing is a testing method that automatically generates and tests a wide range of inputs, often missed by tests written by humans, ensuring robust tests and helping developers find edge cases more easily. The library creates unit tests. In a nutshell, Hypothesis can parametrize tests, running test functions over a wide range of matching data from a "search strategy" established by the library. Through parameterization, Hypothesis can catch bugs that might have gone unnoticed by writing manual test inputs. There have been a few efforts ([pybamm-team/PyBaMM#4703](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/issues/4703), [pybamm-team/PyBaMM#4724](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/pull/4724)) to add property-based testing, and this project would aim to identify all the test functions that can benefit from and use Hypothesis to implement property-based testing.
```

### Technical details

> `pytest` includes several beneficial features, such as parameterization of tests and using fixtures. There are multiple ongoing efforts to utilize `pytest`'s features better within PyBaMM ([parameterization and fixtures](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/issues/4502), [removing shared.py](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/pull/4401), [more fixtures](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/issues/4837)), but we still have a long way to go. The project will start by picking up existing issues and cherry-picking PRs that are working towards a better testing suite, then slowly take over to create custom `pytest` fixtures or even plugins if required. The mentee will also be tasked to update the deprecated/outdated libraries and syntax used in the testing suite, such as `numpy.assert_almost_equal` statements. Therefore, the project requires auditing the entire testing suite, pointing out outdated, redundant, or deprecated tools and libraries being used, and replacing them with more modern (or `pytest`) solutions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pytest` includes several beneficial features, such as parameterization of tests and using fixtures. There are multiple ongoing efforts to utilize `pytest`'s features better within PyBaMM ([parameterization and fixtures](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/issues/4502), [removing `tests/shared.py`](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/pull/4401), [more fixtures](https://github.com/pybamm-team/PyBaMM/issues/4837)), but we still have a long way to go. The project will start by picking up existing issues and cherry-picking PRs that are working towards a better testing suite, then slowly take over to create custom `pytest` fixtures or even plugins if required. The mentee will also be tasked to update the deprecated/outdated libraries and syntax used in the testing suite, such as `numpy.assert_almost_equal` statements. Therefore, the project requires auditing the entire testing suite, pointing out outdated, redundant, or deprecated tools and libraries being used, and replacing them with more modern (or `pytest`) solutions.
```

> `Hypothesis` provides several easy-to-use decorators. Once the mentee has identified functions that will benefit from property-based testing, they can use decorators provided by `Hypothesis` to give the identified test functions set of properties. The project might require some minimal updates in PyBaMM's CI to accommodate for new plugins and libraries; hence, the mentee will be involved in writing YAML files for GitHub Actions.

Reviewer: I think we should be consistent with the use of the noun, as we should write "Hypothesis" to refer to the project as a whole (without backticks), and use `hypothesis` to refer strictly to the Python library (with backticks). This is similar to my suggestions above. What do you think?

```suggestion
Hypothesis provides several easy-to-use decorators. Once the mentee has identified functionality that will benefit from property-based testing, they can use decorators provided by Hypothesis to give the identified test functions a set of properties. The project might require some minimal updates in PyBaMM's CI to accommodate new plugins and libraries; hence, the mentee will be involved in writing YAML files for GitHub Actions.
```

### Expected outcomes

- Efficient tests: Tests that act exactly how they act right now, but are better organised and use the right tool for the right job (instead of using an arbitrary tool that does the job)

> - Implementation: Refactoring tests using `pytest` plugins and features; audit of the testing suite; using `Hypothesis` wherever it can be used; no outdated syntax remaining

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implementation: Refactoring tests using `pytest` plugins and features; audit of the testing suite; using Hypothesis wherever it can be used; no outdated syntax remaining
```

### Potential mentors

* [Saransh Chopra](https://Saransh-cpp.github.io/)
* [Agriya Khetarpal](https://github.com/agriyakhetarpal/)

<!-- * [Valentin Sulzer](https://github.com/valentinsulzer)
* [Robert Timms](https://github.com/rtimms)
* [Arjun Verma](https://arjxnpy.vercel.app/)
* [Ferran Brosa Planella](https://www.brosaplanella.xyz/) -->

## pytest-ifying the testing suite

> PyBaMM (Python Battery Mathematical Modelling) used `unittest` as its testing framework until last year. However, thanks to the efforts from [@prady0t](https://github.com/prady0t), it now uses `pytest.` `pytest` is a modern and community-maintained testing framework for Python that is more flexible and feature-rich than the built-in `uni test` module. Migrating such a huge codebase from `unittest` to `pytest` was an exceptional feat; however, because of limited time and resources, we could not leverage several amazing things that `pytest` offers. There have been efforts to introduce `pytest` specific features, but these efforts have been distributed, and now the codebase is at an awkward stage where some tests utilize `pytest`'s capabilities and some do not.

Author: ```suggestion
PyBaMM (Python Battery Mathematical Modelling) used `unittest` as its testing framework until last year. However, thanks to the efforts from [@prady0t](https://github.com/prady0t), it now uses `pytest.` `pytest` is a modern and community-maintained testing framework for Python that is more flexible and feature-rich than the built-in `unittest` module. Migrating such a huge codebase from `unittest` to `pytest` was an exceptional feat; however, because of limited time and resources, we could not leverage several amazing things that `pytest` offers. There have been efforts to introduce `pytest` specific features, but these efforts have been distributed, and now the codebase is at an awkward stage where some tests utilize `pytest`'s capabilities and some do not.
```

- Documentation: Updated contributing guide to reflect the new testing conventions for future developers

### Desired skills

- Some experience with unit testing using `pytest` in Python
- Python programming experience, Git version control, and GitHub workflow for open-source projects
- An affinity for reading lots of code
- As a plus, knowledge on how to use scientific computing libraries (NumPy, SciPy)
- Some experience with using `pytest` plugins is beneficial, but not required
- Some understanding of continuous integration providers (GitHub Actions, etc.) and coverage tools (Codecov, `pytest-cov`, etc.) is beneficial, but not required

### Difficulty

**Easy**. This project is suitable for a 175-hour duration.

### Potential mentors

* [Saransh Chopra](https://Saransh-cpp.github.io/)

<!-- * [Pradyot Ranjan](https://github.com/prady0t/)
* [Agriya Khetarpal](https://github.com/agriyakhetarpal/)
* [Valentin Sulzer](https://github.com/valentinsulzer)
* [Robert Timms](https://github.com/rtimms)
* [Arjun Verma](https://arjxnpy.vercel.app/)

> * [Ferran Brosa Planella](https://www.brosaplanella.xyz/) -->

Author: Feel free to uncomment your names!

Reviewer: I can think about it when we will have finalised the projects in the upcoming month(s). :)
